---
layout: post
title: Self hosted vpn for home lab
tags: selfhost homelab
---
Self hosting is gaining momentum everywhere as privacy is becoming
concern. Self hosting also provides an opprtunity to learn different
stack that are used by big companies in production. There are so many
things to selfhost these days [link](github awesome selfhosted) but how
do we access those services? One option is to make it publicly
accessible through the internet but let's be honest here, it comes with
its own set of challenges and increases the attack surface that not many
people are willing to take that risk. The best alternative to exposing
your service to the public is to expose it via a private Virtual
Private Network(VPN). I don't think I need to give an introduction to
what a VPN is in this article. I am not talking about the commercial
VPNs that are used to stream Netflix from a different country ;). I am
talking about creating our own VPN to access the self hosted services
from anywhere in the world without opening up the service to publicly in
the internet. There are many alternatives these days ranging
from partially closed source to completely open source. I want to
discuss three solutions I tried: 1) Tail scale(partially closed source)
2) Nebula(Fully open source) 3) Vanilla Wireguard(Fully open source).

-- Mention about NAT travesal.
## Tailscale
I first heard about it in the self hosted podcast. 
My mind was blown when I tried it for the first
time as it worked like magic. It is cofounded by <sshuttleauthor> who is
the author of the amazing [sshuttle](), which I use almost everyday at
work.

-- Mention about Nebula being a flat mesh network
