---
layout: post
title: "A small history on Large block sizes in Linux: Part 0"
tags: os kernel
---

This is a multipart series where I will be going over the support of
Large block sizes in Linux.

### What is a Large block anyway?
It is important to define what a Large Block Size(LBS) is before writing a
three part article about it. In the context of Linux, LBS is defined as
a scenario when the **block size is greater than page size** of the system.
Block size can refer to both logical block size of a block device or a
filesystem block size of a filesystem.

Linux has historically only supported block sizes which are less than or
equal to system page size. We shall get into why later in this
article. This means that block size of a filesystem or a block device
can never be greater than 4096 in an x86_64 system. Is that a problem
for most people? The answer is likely no, but there are use cases where
having a system that supports LBS is useful.

### Why Large block size?

- One of the earliest use case from 2007 for LBS was from CDs and DVDs which have
bigger block sizes around 32k and 64k[1]. People dealt it with having a
shim layer to overcome this limitation, but it had an effect on I/O
speed.

- Another use case for LBS is the growing size of SSDs (High capacity SSDs).
As these SSDs need a bigger mapping table leading increased RAM costs,
device manufacturers are increasing the block size in which they do
mapping (Indirection unit) to reduce the cost. I wrote a detailed article
about Indirection unit and its effect on WAF [here](https://blog.pankajraghav.com/2023/12/18/IU-WAF.html).

- Mounting a filesystem that was formatted with larger blocksizes than
  it is supported in a different system. Let's say a drive was formatted
  with 64k block size on a PowerPC system (as the page size is 64k) but
  the drive needs to be analyzed on a x86_64 system. This is currently
  impossible as x86_64 cannot mount a filesystem with 64k block size.

- A database might have a bigger 
["page size"](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4401910/mysql-what-is-a-page)
  than the underlying filesystem's block size due to the LBS limitation.
  It is much more useful if both the filesystem and database have the
  same notion of a block size which might simplifify the database and
  reduce the number of operations to ensure consistency.


### Why the limitation on block sizes?
TL;DR, Linux Page cache.

Page cache is an integral part in Linux when accessing a filesystem.
Page cache can be thought of as a simple buffer cache that kernel
manages to speed up access to a file. For example, a simple pread/pwrite
will go through the page cache if the file was not opened with `O_DIRECT`.

Kernel will flush the cache that was modified regularly through a
mechanism called writeback. The minimum unit of flushing is PAGE_SIZE as
the linux page cache is strongly tied to the system page size.

In case of filesystems, a block represents minimum allocation, and it cannot
be split during writeback. Therefore, during writeback, the only way to
guarantee the whole "block" can be written to the device is to make sure
the block size does not go beyond the minimum writeback unit size, which
is a PAGE_SIZE.

### Conclusion:
This article discussed what is LBS, why LBS and why LBS is not currently
supported in Linux. The next part will discuss the first effort that was
attempted to solve the LBS issue in 2007.

Happy reading!

### References:
[1] [Large blocksize support](https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/20070424222105.883597089@sgi.com/)
